== Synopsis

A simple genome scaffolder API for merging sequence contigs to build a continuous draft sequence. The draft sequence is constructed through specifying the order of contigs in in human-readable YAML files. Since the draft genome is specified by the scaffold YAML it is easy to remove or manipulate already sequences. In addition as the scaffold file is easy to edit and is ideal for version control and repeatability.

== Feature List

* Construct a draft sequence scaffold using human-readable and versionable plain text files.
* A simple and extensible Ruby API to manipulate the scaffold.

== Installing

Ruby and RubyGems are required to use scaffolder. Scaffolder is installed on the command line using:

  $ gem install scaffolder

== Quick start

Given a fasta file containing two sequences.

  >seqA
  GCGCGC
  >seqB
  ATATAT

A simple genome scaffold containing the two sequences is specified as a YAML formatted text file shown below. Each dash (-) indicates a region in the scaffold. In the example below the keyword *sequence* inserts a sequence from the fasta file, the keyword *source* identifies that seqA should be used.

  ---
    - sequence:
        source: 'seqA'
    - sequence:
        source: 'seqB'

The scaffolder API can then be used as follows to generate a complete sequence.

  scaffold = Scaffolder.new('scaffold.yml','sequences.fasta')
  sequence = scaffold.inject(String.new) do |build,entry|
    build << entry.sequence
  end
  puts sequence # Prints GCGCGCATATAT

== The Scaffold File

The above example is simplified to demonstrates basic usage. The sections below outline the types of regions that can be used in the scaffold file.

=== Sequence Regions

Contigs sequences in the scaffold are specified using the *sequence* keyword. The *source* keyword should specifies the sequence to use from the fasta file and should match the first space delimited word in the fasta header.

==== Sub-Sequences

When generating a scaffolder only a subset of a sequence may be required. Inserting sub-sequences into the scaffold is specified using the *start* and *stop* keywords. All of the sequence before the start coordinate is ignored and all of sequence after the stop coordinate is ignored, meaning only the sequence between the start and stop position inclusively is used in the scaffold.

  ---
    - sequence:
        source: 'sequence1'
        start: 42
        stop: 1764

==== Reverse Complementation

The *reverse* keyword specifies that the selected sequence is reversed complemented.

  ---
    - sequence:
        source: 'sequence1'
        reverse: true

=== Insert Regions

Sequence contigs may contain gaps, for example where the sequence could not be correctly resolved during assembly. Additional sequencing may however produce sequences that can be used to fill these gaps. These inserts can be added to a sequence using the *insert* keyword and specifying a YAML array of the inserts. Multiple inserts can be specified, each separated by a dash (-) followed by a new line.

  ---
    - sequence:
        source: 'sequence1'
        inserts:
          -
            source: 'insert1'
            open: 3
            close: 10

==== Insert Position

The location where an insert is added to a sequence is defined by either the *open*, *close* keywords, or both. This defines where the host sequence is 'opened' and 'closed' to add the insert. If only one parameter is used, for example using *open*, then the close position is determined from the length of the insert sequence and vice versa.

==== Insert Sub-Sequence

An insert can be subsequenced in the same way as a sequence using the *start* and *stop* keywords. Similarly the insert sequence can be reverse completed using the *reverse* keyword.

  ---
    - sequence:
        source: 'sequence1'
        inserts:
          -
            source: 'insert1'
            open: 3
            close: 10
            start: 8
            stop: 16
            reverse: true


=== Unresolved Regions

There may be regions in between sequences in the genome which are unknown but which the approximate length is. These can be specified in the scaffold file using the *unresolved* keyword. Unresolved regions are filled with 'N' nucleotide characters equal to the value specified by the *length* keyword.

  ---
    - unresolved:
        length: 10

=== Scaffold File Processing Order

The scaffolder API processes the regions in YAML scaffold file as follows:

* Each region in the scaffold in processed in the order specified in the scaffolder file.
* If the region is a sequence and inserts are specified, the inserts are sorted by stop position, then processed from last to first. Each insert is processed as follows:
  * The insert is subsequenced if specified.
  * The insert is reverse complemented if specified.
  * The insert is added to each host sequence replacing the region of sequence specified by the open and close co-ordinates.
  * The host sequence stop position is extended by the difference in length that the insert sequence fills. For example if a 5 base pair insert fills a 4 base region, the host sequence stop position is increased by the difference: 1.
* The region is subsequenced if specified.
* The region is reverse complemented if specified.

==== WARNING

Inserts with overlapping *open* and *close* regions in the same sequence will cause unexpected behaviour and should be avoided.

== Contributors

Scaffolder was developed by Michael Barton. Pull requests, patches and bug reports are welcome.

== Copyright

Scaffolder © 2010 by Michael Barton. YARD is licensed under the MIT license. Please see the LICENSE document for more information.
